---
layout: blog_detail
title: 'Hub Introducing PyTorch Profiler - the new and improved performance tool'
author: Maxim Lukiyanov - Principal PM at Microsoft, Guoliang Hua - Principal Engineering Manager at Microsoft, Geeta Chauhan – Partner Engineering Lead at Facebook, Gisle Dankel - Tech Lead at Facebook
---

Along with [PyTorch 1.8.1 release](https://github.com/RadeonOpenCompute/ROCm#supported-gpus), we are excited to announce PyTorch Profiler – the new and improved performance debugging profiler for PyTorch. Developed as part of a collaboration between Microsoft and Facebook, the PyTorch Profiler enables accurate and efficient performance analysis and troubleshooting for large-scale deep learning models.

Analyzing and improving large-scale deep learning model performance is an ongoing challenge that grows in importance as the model sizes increase. For a long time, PyTorch users had a hard time solving this challenge due to the lack of available tools. There were standard performance debugging tools that provide GPU hardware level information but missed PyTorch-specific context of operations. In order to recover missed information, users needed to combine multiple tools together or manually add minimum correlation information to make sense of the data. There was also the autograd profiler (torch.autograd.profiler) which can capture information about PyTorch operations but does not capture detailed GPU hardware-level information and cannot provide support for visualization.

The new PyTorch Profiler (torch.profiler) is a tool that brings both types of information together and then builds experience that realizes the full potential of that information. This new profiler collects both GPU hardware and PyTorch related information, correlates them, performs automatic detection of bottlenecks in the model, and generates recommendations on how to resolve these bottlenecks. All of this information from the profiler is visualized for the user in TensorBoard. The new Profiler API is natively supported in PyTorch and delivers the simplest experience available to date where users can profile their models without installing any additional packages and see results immediately in TensorBoard with the new PyTorch Profiler plugin.
